# Trinity Models

## Doctrine of Trinity (Part 6): Modalism
December 19, 2023
    Download
c. Modalism

Last time we talked about the Logos Christology of the early Greek apologists. This doctrine was taken up into Western theology through the church father Irenaeus.

During the following century – the third century – a very different conception of the divine personages emerged in contrast to the Logos doctrine of the Greek apologists. People such as Noetus (ca. 320), Praxeas (ca. early third century), and Sabellius (ca. 215) enunciated a quite different view of God – a unitarian view of God – which goes under various names: Modalism, Monarchianism, or Sabellianism.

According to this view, the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit are not distinct persons. There is only one person who is God. Either it was the Father himself who became incarnate and suffered and died on the cross, the Son was at most the human side of the Father, so to speak – the human face of God the Father. Or, alternatively, the one God sequentially assumed three roles in his relationship to humanity: first, the Father; then the Son, and then the Holy Spirit.

One of the finest treatises written against this early Modalism is by the North African church father Tertullian (155-220), who wrote a treatise called Against Praxeas, a refutation of the views of Praxeas. This is very much worth reading today. If you want to read a treatise by one of the early church fathers, I think this is the one that I would probably recommend. Tertullian's Against Praxeas is a brilliant piece of work. Extremely influential, in this treatise Tertullian brought greater precision to many of the ideas and also introduced much of the terminology that would later be adopted in the credal formulations of the doctrine of the Trinity. Indeed, the word trinitas or “Trinity” stems from Tertullian.

Tertullian was very anxious to preserve what was called the divine monarchy, which was a word used by the early Greek apologists for monotheism. To speak of the monarchy of God was to speak of the only true God – the one God. While he wanted to insist upon the truth of the monarchy, Tertullian also wanted to emphasize what he called the divine economy – a word which he borrowed from Irenaeus. The word “economy” in reference to God seems to have reference to the way in which the one God exists. There is one God, but he doesn't exist just as one person as the Monarchians or the Modalists thought. He says the error of the Monarchians was “thinking that one cannot believe in one only God in any other way than by saying that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are the very selfsame person.” But Tertullian thinks that while all are one by unity of substance he goes on to say,

the mystery of the economy . . . distributes the unity into a Trinity, placing in their order the three persons – the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit: three, however, not in condition but in degree; not in substance but in form; not in power but in aspect; yet of one substance, and of one condition, and of one power, inasmuch as He is one God, from whom these degrees and forms and aspects are reckoned, under the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.

On Tertullian's view, there is one God – one substance that God is – but this is distributed into this economy of three persons each of whom is God.

When Tertullian says that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are all one substance, he is using the word “substance” in both of the senses that the Greek philosopher Aristotle employed that term. On the one hand, according to Aristotle, a substance is just any individual thing. Any thing that exists is a substance. So this podium is a substance. I am a substance. That chair is a substance. They are just individual things. Tertullian would say that there is exactly one thing which is God. There are not three gods. These three persons are one thing, namely, God.

But the other sense in which Aristotle used the word “substance” was to designate the essence of a thing or its very nature. So to talk about substance in this sense was to talk about those properties that go to make a thing what it is. So, for example, a chair has a different essence or nature than a table does or than a horse does. They have different natures or different essences. That is why they are different kind of things – because they have different essential properties. Tertullian wants to affirm that the three persons also share the same essential divine nature. They are one thing – God – but they also share the same nature.

In responding to the prooftext that the Monarchians often used – John 10:30, “I and my Father are one” - Tertullian points out that the fact that you have here a plural subject “I and my Father” and a plural verb “are” indicates that there are two entities – namely, two persons. But he says the predicate here – “one” – is an abstract (not a personal) noun. In Latin, it is the word unum, not unus – not a personal pronoun but an abstract pronoun. “I and my Father are one” – unum. He comments,

Unum, a neuter term, . . . does not imply singularity of number, but unity of essence, likeness, conjunction, affection on the Father's part, . . . and submission on the Son's. . . . When he says, “I and my Father are one” in essence – unum – He shows that there are two, whom He puts on an equality and unites in one.

So in the prooftext, “I and my Father are one,” you have a multiplicity of persons (two distinct persons) but a unity of essence. “I and my Father are one” - not one person, but one in essence. They have the same nature.

When Tertullian says that the monarchy is distributed into the economy in three forms or aspects, he is not affirming Modalism. Rather, what he is saying is that the diversity of the persons all share the same nature. They are one substance, one thing, having one nature.

It has become conventional wisdom today to say that when these church fathers like Tertullian said that God is three persons, they did not mean this in the modern psychological sense of a “person” - as someone who is a center of a self-consciousness, designated by the first-person personal pronoun “I.” Rather they just meant to say there are three individuals, but not three persons in the modern psychological sense. But I think when you read Tertullian himself what you'll find is that that claim is, shall we say, greatly exaggerated. It seems to me that Tertullian does think of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit as three self-conscious persons. For example, in a remarkable passage which is aimed at illustrating the doctrine of the Son as the immanent Logos in the Father's mind (remember, that is what the Greek apologists believed – the Logos was originally immanent within the Father as the Father's reason or mind), Tertullian invites the reader, who he says is created in the image and likeness of God and so in that sense is like God, to think about the role of reason in the reader's own self-reflective thinking. He says,

Observe, then, that when you are silently conversing with yourself, this very process is carried on within you by your reason, which meets you with a word at every movement of your thought, at every impulse of your conception.

Tertullian is thinking here of your own reason as a kind of dialogue partner that you engage with in self-reflective thought. I think probably every one of us has had that experience – talking to yourself, where you are engaged in this self-reflective conversation with yourself. Tertullian says that when we do that, this reason within you meets you as a sort of self-conscious person. He says in a certain sense the word is a second person within you through which you generate thought.

Of course, Tertullian realizes that no human being is literally two persons. But he says when you carry on this conversation with yourself, it is sort of like two persons within you. He says when it comes to God, this is much more fully transacted in God because God contains his immanent Logos even when he is not speaking – when he is silent.

Again, when Tertullian wants to prove that the Father and the Son are personally distinct from each other, he quotes passages from the Scriptures in which the Father and the Son use first person and second person pronouns in dialogue with each other. For example, he quotes Psalm 2:7 where God says, “Thou art my beloved son, today I have begotten thee.” Quoting this verse, Tertullian says to the Modalist, “If you want me to believe Him to be both the Father and the Son, show me some other passage where it is declared, ‘The Lord said unto himself, I am my own Son, today I have begotten myself.’” And, of course, there is no such passage. He quotes numerous passages which, through the use of these personal pronouns, shows the I-thou relationship in which the Father and the Son stand to each other. In an I-you relationship, each one uses the appropriate first-person pronoun in talking to the other as a person.

He challenges the Modalist to explain how a being who is absolutely one and singular can use first-person plural pronouns like “Let us make man in our image.” I think very clearly Tertullian thinks of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit as capable of using personal pronouns as means of self-reference and addressing one another using the second-person pronoun “you,” which shows that they are self-conscious persons. Tertullian concludes, “In these few quotations the distinction of persons in the Trinity is clearly set forth.”

I think it is very difficult to avoid the conclusion that Tertullian does believe that the persons of the Trinity are three, distinct, self-conscious individuals.

The only qualification that might be made to this picture lies in a vestige of the Apologists' old Logos doctrine in Tertullian's theology. He not only accepts their view that there are relations of derivation between the persons of the Trinity – that the Son, for example, is begotten from the Father – but he also holds to the view that these relations are not eternal. He calls the Father “the fountain of the Godhead.” He says, “the Father is the entire substance, but the Son is a derivation and portion of the whole.” The Father, he says, exists eternally with the Logos immanent within his mind. But then at the moment of creation the Logos proceeds from the Father and becomes his only begotten Son, through whom the world is created. So the Logos becomes the Son of God only when he first proceeds from the Father as a substantive being.

Tertullian is very fond of using analogies like the sunbeam emitted by the sun or the river that flows out of the spring to show the oneness of the Son with the Father from whom he proceeds. But he didn't think of this procession as eternal, as later theologians were to do. He thinks of this as something that starts at the moment of creation. The Son, as he puts it, is “God of God,” a phrase that will later be incorporated in the Nicene creed. The Son is God of God. Similarly, the Holy Spirit also proceeds from the Father through the Son.

If I understand him right, it seems that Tertullian would consider the Son and the Spirit to be distinct persons only after their procession from the Father. Before that (as it were, before the moment of creation), they are merely immanent within the Father – he is the fountainhead from which they flow. But they are not at that point personally distinct. Nevertheless, once the Logos proceeds from the Father and the Spirit from the Father and the Son, they clearly are then distinct persons from that point on.

Through the efforts of church fathers like Tertullian, Origen (185-253), Novatian (ca. 251), and many others, the church came to reject Modalism as a proper understanding of God and to affirm that there are three distinct persons within the Godhead who are called Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

During the following century the church would be confronted with a challenge from the opposite end of the spectrum – Arianism – which affirmed the personal distinction of the Father and the Son but denied the deity of the Son. As we'll see, whereas the Modalists affirmed that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are all God but not distinct persons, Arius affirmed that the Father, Son and Spirit are distinct persons but they are not all God. Only the Father is God; the Son is, in fact, a creature who was made by God.

Next week we shall look at the challenge that the church faced in Arianism and how this lead to the Council of Nicaea and the codification of the doctrine of the Trinity.

## Doctrine of Trinity (Part 7): Arianism
December 19, 2023
    Download
d. Arianism

In our study of the Trinity we’ve looked so far at the Logos Christology of the early Greek apologists and then at Modalism. Now we come to the subject of Arianism.

In the year 319 a presbyter of the church of Alexandria, Egypt, named Arius began to propagate his doctrine that the Son is not of the same substance as the Father. You will remember that according to Tertullian Christ is of the same substance or essence as the Father and therefore fully divine. Arius denied that Christ is the same substance as the Father. Rather, he said that Christ had been created by the Father before the beginning of the world. This episode marked the great Trinitarian Controversy that would occupy the church until the end of the 4th century and give us the Nicene Creed and the Constantinopolitan Creed.

You will remember that Tertullian thought that the Logos was begotten by God the Father at the beginning of creation. By contrast, Alexandrian theologians like Origen held that the begetting of the Son (or the Logos) from the Father did not have a beginning. Rather it was an eternal begetting that had always taken place. Arius thought that the reason that the orthodox theologians were so opposed to his view that the Son had a beginning was because he affirmed that the Son did not exist eternally. In his letter to Eusebius of Nicomedia he affirmed, “The Son has a beginning but God is without beginning.” He thought this is why the orthodox theologians were so opposed to him, because he affirmed that the Son had a beginning. But that wasn’t correct. Tertullian himself thought that the Logos was begotten at a certain point in time prior to the creation of the world. What the theologians objected to about Arius’ view wasn’t so much that the Son had a beginning; what they objected to was that this beginning was not a begetting, but was in fact a creation and that the Son was therefore a creature. Arius denied that there was even an immanent Logos or Word or Reason within God prior to the creation of the world. So the beginning of the Logos was not from the substance of the Father; rather the Father created the Logos out of nothing. He created the Son, and therefore the Son was a creature. This is what the orthodox theologians really found offensive.

Athanasius, who became the bishop of Alexandria and was a champion of Nicene orthodoxy, protested that on Arius’ view the Son is “a creature and a work, not proper to the Father’s essence” (Orations Against the Arians [1.3.9]). It was simply blasphemy to affirm that the Son is a work and a creature, not belonging to the essence of the Father. On Arius’ view God the Father existing without the Son lacked even his Word and his wisdom. He didn’t have those immanent qualities within him. This is blasphemous.

In the year 325 the Council of Antioch condemned Arius’ views. They condemned anybody who says that the Son is a creature or that the Son is originated or created or made or not truly an offspring – that is, someone who is begotten, not made. They condemned anyone who said that at one time the Son did not exist. Later in that same year, 325, the emperor Constantine convened an ecumenical council at Nicaea. That is to say, this was not a local council. This was a universal council that drew bishops from all across the Roman Empire to convene at Nicaea and pronounce on the doctrine of Arius.

The Council of Nicaea then propagated the creedal formulation of trinitarian belief in the Nicene Creed. It is worth mentioning that the Arians who were represented at the Council were very few. There were probably only six Arian bishops present at the Council. Then there probably around seventy to ninety of the bishops were in the Semi-Arian camp. What they wanted to say was the Son isn’t the same substance as the Father, but he is similar in substance to the Father. There were thirty bishops who were squarely in Athanasius’ camp – in the orthodox camp. The vast majority belonged to a sort of confused center camp which had around 200 bishops in it and didn’t know what was going on. They couldn’t understand this debate.

The Athanasian camp carried the day and persuaded the vast majority of the bishops to condemn Arianism and to propagate the statement of the Trinity that we confess today.

Let’s read through the Nicene Creed, and then we will comment on it.

We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of all things, visible and invisible;

And in one Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, begotten from the Father, only-begotten, that is, from the substance of the Father, God from God, Light from Light, true God from true God, begotten not made, of one substance with the Father, through Whom all things came into being, things in heaven and things on earth, Who because of us men and because of our salvation came down and became incarnate, becoming man, suffered and rose again on the third day, ascended into the heavens, and will come to judge the living and the dead.

And in the Holy Spirit.

So we believe in one God the Father, one Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Spirit – all three members of the Trinity.

Then there are affixed to the Creed these condemnations of Arian propositions:

But for those who say ‘there was when he was not’ and ‘before being born he was not’ and that ‘he came into existence out of nothing’ or who assert ‘the Son of God is from a different hypostasis or substance, or is created, or is subject to alteration or change’ – these the Catholic Church anathematizes.

These Arian propositions are condemned in this suffix to the creed.

Several features of this statement deserve comment.

1. Notice that the Son and, I think, by implication the Holy Spirit, is declared to be of the same substance as the Father. The Greek word for this is homoousios. Homo the word for “same” + ousios from the word for “substance.” So the Father and the Son are declared to be of the same substance. That is to say, they are of the same essence. They have the same divine nature. Therefore the Son cannot be a creature as Arius claimed. Arius wanted to say that the Son has a different nature – heteroousios – from the Father. Hetero meaning “different than,” as in the word “heterosexual” (opposite sex). Heteroousios: a different substance; whereas the orthodox affirmed the same substance, the same essence.

I mentioned the Semi-Arians who were present at the Council. They were championing the word homoiousios to describe the relation of the Father and the Son meaning that they were similar in essence. They feared that by saying they were the same substance this would imply Modalism – that there wasn’t a diversity of persons in the Godhead. So they wanted to say he is not of the same essence or substance, but he is of a similar substance. There was a world of difference that lay in this single iota that distinguished homoousios from homoiousios. On homoousios, the Son is fully divine. He is God. On homoiousios he isn’t divine. He doesn’t have the divine essence. He is simply similar to the Father and therefore just as much (as the Arians implied) a creature and a work, which was blasphemy.

2. Notice that the Son is declared to be begotten not made. The creed says that he is God from God, light from light, true God from true God, begotten, not made. This is the vestige of the old Logos Christology of the Greek apologists which held that the Logos is begotten in his divine nature from the Father, but not created.

Notice that this is said with respect, not to Christ’s human nature, but with respect to his divine nature. In his very divinity he is begotten from the Father. Therefore just as offspring of natural generation which are begotten share the same nature as their parents – cats beget cats, dogs beget dogs, people beget people – so the Son and the Father share the same divine nature because the Son is begotten from the Father, not created by the Father.

The Nicene statement is based upon a draft of a creed that was proposed by Eusebius of Caesarea. This isn’t Eusebius of Nicomedia to whom Arius wrote whom I quoted before. This Eusebius is from the coastal town in Israel called Caesarea Maritima. You can still visit this town today on a trip to Israel and see the ruins of this great port city of Caesarea Maritima there on the coast of the Mediterranean. This is where Eusebius of Caesarea flourished and worked. In his initial draft of the Creed he used the word Logos instead of “Son.” So whenever you see the word “Son” in the Nicene Creed, in Eusebius’ draft he was using the word Logos. The Logos is declared to be begotten of the Father before all ages. That is, as I say, the legacy of this old Logos Christology of the Greek apologists.

Notice similarly in the condemnations which are affixed to the end of the Nicene Creed, they reject the view that this begetting had a beginning. The begetting is eternal. They condemn those who say there was a time when he was not or before being born he was not. They anathematize anyone who says that this begetting of the Son or the Logos in his divine nature is not eternal but had a beginning.

Athanasius, in his treatise Four Discourses against the Arians, uses a very subtle and interesting word play to differentiate between the Father and the Son in this regard. It is really a pun. He says that the Father and the Son are both agenētos (agenētos means uncreated or unoriginated – it never came into being). He says that the Father and the Son are both agenētos. By contrast he says that only the Father is agennētos with two “n”s. This is a different word, and this means unbegotten. Only the Father is agennētos, with two “n”s, unbegotten. The Son is gennētos with two “n”s – he is begotten. Just as there was a world of difference with that single iota between homoiousios and homoousios, so there is a world of difference between agenētos (with a single “n”) and agennētos with a double “n.” The Father and the Son are both agenētos in the sense of being uncreated, never having had a time when they came into being; but only the Father is unbegotten in the sense of agennētos. The Son is gennētos or begotten of the Father.

3. Notice the condemnation at the end of those who say that Christ is a different hypostasis or substance from the Father. This clause occasioned great confusion and controversy within the early church. Hypostasis is a Greek word which is etymologically similar to, and therefore synonymous with, the Latin word substantia or “substance.” You can see that etymologically – hypo means “under” like a hypodermic needle (it goes under the skin). Or hypothermia – your temperature goes down. Hypo means “under.” It means the same thing that sub means in Latin, like a submarine that goes under the water. In Latin sub means the same thing as hypo in Greek. Stasis and stantia are the Greek and the Latin words respectively for “standing under something.” A hypostasis is something that stands under something. A substance (substantia) is something that stands under something in the sense that these are property bearers. They exist in themselves. Properties exist in these substances. They are possessed by these substances. A hypostasis and a substance would seem to have the same meaning. These two words just seem to be the Greek and the Latin of the same thing.

Although the Nicene Creed is drafted in Greek, the meaning of its terms is Latin. It is in Greek but the authors take hypostasis to mean the same thing as substantia. Therefore they condemn those who say that there is a plurality of hypostases in God. There is only one substance in God, right? God is one substance. So they condemn anyone who says that there is more than one hypostasis or ousia – substance – in God.

The problem was, for native Greek-speaking theologians from the eastern part of the Roman Empire where Greek was the common language, not Latin, they didn’t take hypostasis to be a synonym of substantia. For them, a hypostasis just meant a concrete individual. So, for example, Gregory of Nyssa, one of the great Greek church fathers, explains that a hypostasis, “is what subsists and is specially and peculiarly indicated by a name.” For example, Paul. Paul is the name of a hypostasis, an individual. This individual is in contrast to ousia in Greek in the sense of the essence of something. So they would say that Paul and Jim and Cindy all have the same ousia – they all have the same essence – but they are different hypostases – different individuals exemplifying that essence or having that nature. Therefore to say that there are not distinct hypostases in God is to endorse Modalism. It is to say the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are all the same individual. That was obviously wrong. Clearly there are distinct hypostases in the Trinity because they have different properties. For example, only the Father has the property of being unbegotten, whereas the Son has the property of being begotten. So there are different individuals in the Trinity. They have different properties. To these eastern theologians the statement of the Nicene Creed that condemns those who say that the Son is a different hypostasis from the Father sounded like Modalism – that they were all the same person.

This led to enormous confusion and debate. Finally after decades of debate the confusion was finally cleared up at the Council of Alexandria in 362. At that council they affirmed the doctrine of homoousios – there is one substance, one essence, in God – but they allowed that there are three different divine hypostases. They recognized the Greek understanding of what a hypostasis is. It is not a synonym to substance. Rather, a hypostasis is a concrete individual who bears or exemplifies a nature.

Eventually the church came to recognize that in God there is one substance with three hypostases – three individuals.

The Nicene Creed that we affirm today is not the same one as the original that condemned those who say there are more than one hypostasis. The one that we affirm was promulgated later (the Constantinopolitan Creed) and affirms that there are a plurality of hypostases.

With that we come to the end of our time. What we will want to do next time is examine more closely exactly what these hypostases were that were affirmed to be in the Godhead. There is one God, one substance, and then there are these three hypostases. What were those? That is what we will look at next time.

## Doctrine of Trinity (Part 8): Council of Nicaea
December 19, 2023
    Download
e. Council of Nicaea

Today we want to continue our discussion of the Nicene Creed. As we begin today it would be useful to read it through one more time to refresh our memories before we proceed.

We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of all things, visible and invisible;

And in one Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, begotten from the Father, only-begotten, that is, from the substance of the Father, God from God, Light from Light, true God from true God, begotten not made, of one substance with the Father, through Whom all things came into being, things in heaven and things on earth, Who because of us men and because of our salvation came down and became incarnate, becoming man, suffered and rose again on the third day, ascended into the heavens, and will come to judge the living and the dead.

And in the Holy Spirit.

But for those who say ‘there was when he was not’ and ‘before being born he was not’ and that ‘he came into existence out of nothing’ or who assert ‘the Son of God is from a different hypostasis or substance, or is created, or is subject to alteration or change’ – these the Catholic Church anathematizes.

Last week we went through a blizzard of terminology in discussing this creedal statement, and lest you go away confused, let me pare it down to just a couple of essential terms that I think you should add to your theological vocabulary on the basis of the Creed. The first would be the word homoousias. That comes from the Greek words homo (meaning “the same” as in “homogenized” or “homosexual”), and then from the Greek word ousia which means “substance” or “essence.” The Creed declares that the Father and the Son (and by implication the Holy Spirit) are the same substance. They are the same essence. That is to say the Son is fully divine. He's not some sort of subordinate deity or a created thing, however exalted. He is God. The Father and the Son have the same substance or essence.

The other word that would be helpful for you to know is hypostasis. A hypostasis is an individual. It means something that has properties – a property bearer. As I pointed out, in the original Nicene Creed the word hypostasis is taken to be synonymous with substance – ousia or essence. That's why the Creed has this anathema appended to it condemning anyone who says that the Son is of a different hypostasis or substance. This is the term that created so much controversy in the Eastern church because to the Greek-speaking Eastern theologians hypostasis wasn't synonymous with substance. A hypostasis, as I say, was an individual. So, for example, Paul and Cindy and Jim are different individuals, but they all share the same nature – humanity. They are individual instances or examples of the same substance. Their common substance is humanity, and they are individually different people. That's why over the course of the fourth century the church revised the Creed so that hypostasis and substance were no longer considered synonyms, and so the orthodox doctrine became that there are indeed three hypostases – three individuals – in one substance. There's one substance – God. One divine essence. Then there are three individuals – three hypostases – that share that divine essence: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

Now the question is: if there are three hypostases all sharing the divine nature, what are these? The opinion unanimously on the part of orthodox theologians is that these are persons. Three persons. It's very frequently said today that we must not read this affirmation that they are persons anachronistically by importing into it the modern psychological concept of a person. While this caution may be in order, still I think that it needs to be seriously qualified. What is true is that the word hypostasis does not mean person. They're not synonymous words. Hypostasis is an individual – a property bearer. Nevertheless when you talk about a rational hypostasis, then this does come very close, indeed, to the modern concept of a person. For Aristotle, the ancient Greek philosopher, the essence or nature of man is captured by the phrase “rational animal.” That's what human nature is. Man is a rational animal. We have an animal body joined with a rational soul, and that differentiates us from mere animals. Animals have souls according to Aristotle, but they lack rationality. They have lower-order souls that don't have rationality. So it's this property of rationality that serves to distinguish human beings from other animals. So a rational hypostasis can only be a person. It is a person.

This was strongly emphasized by the Cappadocian church fathers – some of the most important of the post-Nicene church fathers. Cappadocia is in central Turkey today. (If you ever get a chance to visit Cappadocia by all means go. It is unworldly, this ancient region in central Turkey). Among the Cappadocian fathers were people like Gregory of Nyssa (335-95) and Gregory Nazianzus (329-90). And then there was Basil of Caesarea (331-79). These Cappadocian fathers were very emphatic about the personal nature of these three hypostases in the Godhead. For example, Gregory of Nyssa illustrates the idea of three hypostases having one nature by pointing to Peter, James, and John. He says these are three hypostases all exemplifying the same human nature. I don't know how else you could take that than by saying that these are three persons who share the same human nature. Moreover, they ascribe to the three divine hypostases properties which are constitutive of a personhood such as mutual knowledge, mutual love, and mutual will. They emphasize that these three persons are always in concord, always in harmony, with one another, and so they cannot be separated or disagree with one another.  Gregory Nazianzus boasts that, unlike the Modalists, we “worship the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, One Godhead; God the Father, God the Son and . . . God the Holy Spirit, One Nature in Three Personalities, intellectual, perfect, self-existent, numerically separate, but not separate in Godhead” (Oration 33.16). 

The ascription of personal properties to these three individuals in the Godhead is especially evident in the Cappadocian fathers’ strong emphasis upon the full equality of the Holy Spirit with the Father and the Son. You notice in the Nicene Creed the Holy Spirit gets short shrift. All it says is “and in the Holy Spirit” - we believe in him, too. But the Cappadocian fathers emphasized that like the Son the Holy Spirit is a divine hypostasis. Basil, for example, says that the Holy Spirit is not only incorporeal, purely immaterial, and indivisible, but, “We are compelled to direct our thoughts on high and to think of an intelligent being boundless in power” (On the Holy Spirit 9.22). So the Holy Spirit is an intelligent being boundless in power. He quotes 1 Corinthians 2:11 where Paul says, “For what person knows a man’s thoughts except the spirit of the man which is in him? So also no one comprehends the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God.” Basil compares the Holy Spirit to the human spirit that is in each of us. He says in his sanctifying work the Holy Spirit makes people spiritual by bringing them into “fellowship with himself.” So these Cappadocian fathers would have resisted fiercely any attempt to depersonalize the Holy Spirit and make him into some sort of impersonal divine force. I think it's evident that their intention was to affirm that there are really three persons in a rich psychological sense in the one God.

While Modalism affirmed the equal deity of the three persons at the expense of their distinctness, and Arianism affirmed their distinctness at the expense of their equal deity, orthodox Christianity maintained both the equal deity and the personal distinctness of the three persons. Moreover they did this without surrendering their commitment to monotheism. There exists only one God who is three persons – Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

That completes the historical survey that I wanted to do with you of the doctrine of the Trinity. I think it does bear mentioning, at least, as we conclude this section that you can see how misleading it is when certain cultic groups like Jehovah's Witnesses or secular authors like Dan Brown say that at the Council of Nicaea 325 years after Christ the church voted to make Jesus divine and voted to adopt the doctrine of the Trinity. That is a gross misrepresentation. Right from the very beginning – from the Logos doctrine of the Greek apologists – Christ was regarded as divine. The modalists affirmed that he was divine. This wasn't some sort of late developing doctrine that the church suddenly voted on at Nicaea. What they were struggling to articulate is the relationship between these three persons – the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Right from the very beginning Christ was affirmed to be God. That's in the pages of the New Testament. The question was how can he be God and not be the Father? How do you make sense of that? The doctrine of the Trinity was the church's attempt to make sense of that truth.

2.  Coherence of the Doctrine

         a.  The Problem

Is there, then, a philosophical problem of the Trinity? Jeff Brower and Michael Rea observe that there is nothing particularly philosophically problematic about what I’ve called the biblical doctrine of the Trinity.

The central claim of the doctrine of the Trinity is that God exists in three persons – Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. This claim is not problematic because of any superficial incoherence or inconsistency with well-entrenched intuitions. Rather, it is problematic because of a tension that results from constraints imposed on its interpretation by other aspects of orthodox Christian theology. . . neatly summarized in . . . the so-called Athanasian creed.[1]

It is these accreted constraints that occasion philosophical problems for the biblical doctrine of the Trinity. So one finds that philosophical articles on the subject of the Trinity very typically begin with quotations from later conciliar formulations of the doctrine, particularly the apparently incoherent Athanasian creed.

The biblical doctrine of the Trinity, by contrast, becomes problematic only when statements such as the following:

1. The Father is God.

2. The Son is God.

3. The Son is not the Father.

are construed as identity statements. But treating affirmations like (1-3) as identity statements requires a modern grasp of the logical relation of identity that the ancients in general and the NT writers in particular did not have. This fact illuminates Arthur Wainwright’s provocative suggestion that most of the authors of the NT were not even aware of “a Trinitarian problem,” much less interested in a solution to it.[2] That is to say, the mutual relationship of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit just did not appear problematic to them. Wainwright thinks that Paul, the author of Hebrews, and John were aware of a problem, though John alone clearly conceived it and sought to provide a solution to it (presumably, in his doctrine of the immanent Logos).

This claim might seem at first implausible. What, after all, could be more obvious than that a =a, that everything is identical to itself? Doubtless, NT writers were intuitively aware, for example, that the Father is the Father and not the Son. But the identity relation is far more subtle and difficult than that, and a fairly sophisticated understanding of identity is necessary in order to discern a problem of the Trinity.

The relation of identity is today understood to be the strongest equivalence relation, holding between an object and itself and nothing else, an irreducible relation characterized by reflexivity (a =a), symmetry (if a =b, then b =a), and transitivity (if a =b and b =c, then a =c). As such, it expresses what has come to be known as Leibniz’s Law of the Indiscernibility of Identicals, which may be simply stated as

LL.  An object x is identical with an object y only if every property of x is a property of y and vice versa.

In the ancient world, philosophers had scant understanding of the identity relation. A prescient Aristotle wrote briefly in his Topics,

Again look and see if, supposing the one to be the same as something, the other also is the same as it; for if they be not the same as the same thing, clearly neither are they the same as one another. Moreover, examine them in the light of their accidents and the things of which they are accidents; for any accident belonging to the one must belong also to the other, and if the one belong to anything as an accident, so must the other also. If in any of these respects there is a discrepancy clearly they are not the same (Topica vii.1 (152a30).

Here Aristotle not only grasps the relation of identity as a reflexive, symmetric, and transitive relation, but, incredibly, anticipates Leibniz’s Law of the Indiscernibility of Identicals.  The historians of logic William and Martha Kneale observe, however, that these isolated comments of Aristotle went largely unnoticed, his insights being rediscovered only centuries later, and so it is “not surprising that he does not generally get any credit for them.”[3]

If ancient philosophers were largely ignorant of the relation of identity, how much more the missionary-pastors who authored the NT! For example, while they believed that the Son is God, they would have balked at the assertion that God is the Son, which suggests that we misinterpret them if we construe their initial belief as an identity statement. Similarly, the same author who affirms that the Father is “the only true God” (Jn 17.3) also affirms that Jesus Christ “is the true God and eternal life” (I Jn 5.20), which again suggests that we misconstrue these affirmations if we interpret them as statements of identity. Or again, the fact that the NT authors affirm that the Father is God and that Jesus Christ is God does not lead them to infer that the Father is Jesus Christ, in accordance with the transitivity of identity, showing once more that it is an anachronistic hermeneutical error to import a modern grasp of the identity relation into these authors’ statements.

As if this were not enough, add to the mix the ambiguity of the word “is” in ordinary language, whether Greek or English. Philosophers have distinguished multiple meanings of the word, including not only the “is” of identity (“Mark Twain is Samuel Clemens”), but also the “is” of predication (“Jones is the tallest man in North Dakota”), and the “is” of constitution (“The statue is the block of marble”).

This inherent ambiguity of ordinary language can make it very difficult to discern just when an author, especially one utterly unacquainted with the modern relation of identity, intends to make an identity statement. Philip Bricker rightly warns, “Surface grammar often misrepresents the underlying logic: one must beware inferring logical from grammatical form.”[4] That this is the case for NT authors is obvious when we find that even after the problem of the Trinity has been philosophically explained in terms of the identity relation and the Indiscernibility of Identicals, some contemporary Christians still fail to see any problem at all.[5]

Now obviously the NT authors might have wondered why there are not three Gods. But God’s unicity was already given by Jewish monotheism, which was presupposed. In order to find it problematic that the one God is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit one would haveto have a modern understanding of the identity relation, which NT authors did not have. Given NT authors’ lack of a modern grasp of the identity relation, we must beware of overreading them. It is hardly surprising that they did not find their own trinitarian statements about the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit problematic.

When one says that the Father is God, one is not making an identity statement. When one says the Son is God, one is not making an identity statement. Rather this “is” is an “is” of predication, not of identity. For example, if I say “Elizabeth is Queen” I'm not saying that Elizabeth is identical to the Queen. I am saying she holds the office or the role or the title of being Queen. But it would be possible for there to be co-regents. Sometimes that happens. There's more than one king or more than one queen. So when we say “Elizabeth is Queen” we're not making an identity statement; we're making a predication. You're predicating being Queen of Elizabeth. You're making a statement like this: “Elizabeth is regal.” You're saying she is the Queen in that sense. Not an identity statement but you're assigning a predicate.

So when we say the Father is God, we’re saying the Father is divine. When we say the Son is God, we’re saying the Son is divine. You're making a predication of the Father and the Son. You're predicating full divinity of the Father and the Son. You're not making an identity statement. Otherwise you would get three gods.

When we say the Father is God, the Son is God, those are not identity statements, rather they are predications. They are predicating properties of the Father and the Son, namely the property of being fully divine.

All right. That brings us to the end of our time. What we will do next time is try to address the question: how can there be three persons that all are divine – three divine persons – and yet there not be three gods? How can you have three persons who is each divine and yet not have three gods? That's what we'll talk about next Sunday.

[1] Jeffrey E. Brower and Michael C. Rea, “Material Constitution and the Trinity,” Philosophical and Theological Essays on the Trinity, ed. Thomas McCall and Michael C. Rea (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), p. 264.

[2] Arthur W. Wainwright, The Trinity in the New Testament (London: SPCK, 1962), p. 250.

[3] William and Martha Kneale, The Development of Logic (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962), p. 42.

[4] Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2d ed., ed. Donald M. Borchert, s.v. “Identity,” by Philip Bricker 1996. He cautions in particular that “We should not confuse identity with the relation of co-designation, the relation that holds between singular terms whenever those terms designate the same object.” This fallacy is committed by those who assume too readily that every NT use of the proper name “God” is intended to assert an identity statement between God and the Father.

[5] See, for example, the series of muddled responses by Christopher Date to Dale Tuggy’s challenge on p. 90 of their debate (Dale Tuggy and Christopher M. Date, Is Jesus Human and not Divine?: A Debate, Essential Christian Debates [Apollo, Penn.: Areopagus Books, 2020]). In response to Tuggy’s objection, “Being the same god requires being numerically the same thing. But that requires that ‘they’ never differ in any way. . . . we all know that the Father and Son have differed” (p. 25), Date replies, “I answer that they are the same God. . . I can (and do) therefore affirm that the Father and Son are numerically the same being but differ as persons” (p. 90), oblivious to the problem confronting him. Needleless to say, Date is not appealing to numerical sameness without identity.

## Doctrine of Trinity (Part 9): A Possible Model of the Trinity
December 19, 2023
    Download
A Possible Model of the Trinity

We left off our discussion of the Trinity last time by saying that the biblical doctrine of the Trinity is a logically coherent doctrine when properly understood. But that still leaves us with the question: how can three distinct persons be one being? How can you have three divine persons who are together one being?

Maybe we can get a start at this question by means of an analogy. I want to caution that there is no reason to think that there has to be an analogy to the doctrine of the Trinity among created things. But I think that analogies can be helpful as a springboard, so to speak, for philosophical reflection and for accurate formulation. So consider this analogy. In Greco-Roman mythology one of the labors of Hercules was to subdue the ferocious three-headed dog named Cerberus who guarded the gates of Hades. We can suppose that Cerberus, having three heads, must have had three brains and therefore three distinct states of consciousness. Each one would be whatever it is like to be a dog. Therefore Cerberus, although he is a sentient being, doesn't have a unified consciousness. Rather he has three consciousnesses. Even though he's one being, he has three consciousnesses. We could even give proper names to each of these consciousnesses. For example, rather whimsically, we can refer to them as Rover, Bowser, and Spike. These three centers of consciousness are entirely discrete, and, when you think about it, they might even come into conflict with one another. Still, in order for Cerberus to be viable as a biological organism, not to speak of being able to function effectively as a guard dog, there has to be a considerable degree of cooperation among these three consciousnesses Rover, Bowser, and Spike.

Despite the diversity of his three mental states, Cerberus is clearly, I think, one dog. He is a single biological organism exemplifying a canine nature of some sort. Rover, Bowser, and Spike may also be said to be canine even though they're not three dogs. They are parts or aspects of the one three-headed dog Cerberus. So if Hercules were attempting to enter into Hades and Spike snarled at him or bit him on the leg Hercules might well say Cerberus snarled at me or Cerberus attacked me.

Now I have to confess that the church fathers would have resisted analogies like Cerberus. But I think that once you give up the doctrine of divine simplicity (that God has no distinctions within his being), then Cerberus, I think, does seem to be what St. Augustine called an “image” of the Trinity among creatures. These are not exact analogies, but they are sort of a shadowy image among creatures of what the Trinity is. You have here one biological organism – one dog – which has three centers of consciousness.

We can enhance the Cerberus story by imagining that Cerberus is rational and has self-consciousness. In that case Rover, Bowser, and Spike are plausibly personal agents. They are self-conscious, personal agents. Cerberus would therefore be a tri-personal being.

If we were asked what makes Cerberus a single being despite his three minds, I think we’d doubtlessly reply that it's because he has a single physical body. It's because he is a single biological organism that we would say Cerberus is one thing even though he is tri-personal. But think about this. Suppose Cerberus were to be killed, and his minds survive the death of his body. Suppose they're immortal and live beyond the death of his body. In what sense would they then still be one being? How would those three persons differ intrinsically from three exactly similar minds which have always been unembodied? Do you see the question? If he is one being because he is embodied in this canine organism, if the three minds survive the death of the body, how would they be any different than three minds that have just always existed unembodied? What would make them one being as opposed to three separate beings? And in the case of the Trinity, since the divine persons are (at least prior to the incarnation) unembodied, then we can ask, why do we have here one being rather than three individual beings?

This is a difficult question, but maybe we can get some insight on it by reflecting on the nature of the soul. Souls are immaterial substances, and some philosophers think that animals have souls as well as human beings. On this view souls come in a wide spectrum of varying capacities. For example, higher animals like chimpanzees and dolphins have souls that are more richly endowed than the souls of lower animals like turtles and iguanas. What makes the human soul a person is the fact that the human soul is equipped with rational faculties of intellect and volition which enable it to be a self-reflective agent capable of self-determination. Animals don't have souls that are so richly endowed as to be self-reflective agents capable of self-determination.

When you think about it God is very much like an unembodied soul. In fact, as a mental substance God just seems to be a soul of some sort. We normally would equate a rational soul with a person, but that's because the human souls that we are acquainted with are persons. In our experience all of the rational souls that we’re familiar with are individual persons. But the reason that human souls are individual persons is because each soul is equipped with one set of rational faculties sufficient for being a person. Suppose then that God is a soul which is endowed with three complete sets of rational faculties, each set of which is sufficient for personhood. In that case God, though one soul, would not be one person, but rather he would be three persons. For God would have three centers of self-consciousness, intentionality, and volition. God would clearly not be three discrete souls, since these cognitive faculties are all faculties of just one soul. So God would be one soul which is tri-personal in nature. Just as our individual souls support one person because they are equipped with one set of rational faculties sufficient for personhood, we can think of God as a soul which is equipped with three sets of rational faculties, each sufficient for personhood. This sort of model would seem to give a clear sense to the classical formula three persons in one substance.

So that's the model of the Trinity that I want to propose as a possibility.

## Doctrine of Trinity (Part 10): The Trinitarian Processions
December 19, 2023
    Download
The Trinitarian Processions

Some of you may have noticed that the model that I gave doesn't include the derivation of one person from the other which is enshrined in the confession of the Nicene Creed that the Son is begotten of the Father, light of light, very God of very God, begotten not made. The model doesn't preclude that either. It just leaves it an open question. So if you want to add the derivation of one person from another, you are free to do so, as William Hasker has done with my model. But on the model as I’ve laid it out, God could just exist eternally with his three sets of cognitive faculties and capacities. I, frankly, think this is a strength of the model because although the doctrine of the generation of the Son from the Father and the procession of the Spirit is a part of Nicene orthodoxy, nevertheless it seems to be a relic of the old Logos Christology of the Greek apologists which has no warrant in the biblical text and seems to me to introduce a kind of subordinationism into the Godhead which anybody who wants to affirm the full deity of Christ ought to find troubling.

Biblically speaking, the vast majority of contemporary New Testament scholars recognize that the word which is translated in the authorized version as “only begotten” (namely monogenes) does not refer to the procession of the Son from the Father. It's true that when this word is used in the context of a family, then to say that a child is monogenes or an only child would imply that he's the only begotten. But when you look at the biblical references to monogenes like John 1:14 or John 1:18 they're not talking about some kind of pre-creation or eternal procession of the divine Son from the Father. Rather, they seem to be connected with the historical Jesus’s being God's Son. It is in virtue of the incarnation that Jesus is God's special Son. Look, for example, at Luke 1:35 as an illustration of this. This is the annunciation to Mary by the angel Gabriel. In verse 35 Gabriel says to her, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you and the power of the most high will overshadow you. Therefore the child to be born will be called Holy, the Son of God.” Here Jesus’ being the Son is connected with the virginal conception. It's because Jesus had no human father that he could be called God's special Son. If that's right, then Jesus being monogenes has less to do with the Trinity than with the incarnation.

You can still see this primitive understanding of Jesus’ Sonship in the letters of the first-century, post-apostolic church father Ignatius. Ignatius describes Christ as “one Physician, of flesh and of spirit, begotten and unbegotten, . . .  both of Mary and of God” (Ephesians 7). Here Ignatius associates Jesus’ being begotten with his flesh being begotten of Mary, but insofar as he is Spirit and of God, he is unbegotten. There is no idea here in Ignatius that Christ is begotten in his divine nature.

The transference of Jesus being God’s Son from Jesus of Nazareth to the pre-incarnate Logos seems to be an invention of these early Greek apologists. I think it has served to depreciate the importance of the historical Jesus for Christian faith.

Theologically speaking, orthodox theology rejects firmly any depreciation of the Son with regard to the Father. For example, Athanasius writes, “They that depreciate the Only-Begotten Son of God blaspheme God, defaming His perfection and accusing Him of imperfection, and render themselves liable to the severest chastisement" (In illud omnia mihi tradia sunt 6). Here what Athanasius is condemning is subordinationism, which is a doctrine inspired by Gnostic or Neo-Platonic thought, which conceived of God as “the One” - a kind of undifferentiated unity which then in a kind of series of stair steps descends down to the world in which you have intermediate stages that are not equal to the One but are lower-class deities. For example, Origen, who was trained under the Neo-Platonist philosopher Ammonius Saccas, speaks of the Son as a deity of the second rank, having a sort of derivative divinity as far removed from that of the Father as he himself is from creatures. He says the Son's divinity is as far from the Father's divinity as it is from the creatures below him. That kind of subordinationism was rejected by the church fathers. Origen was condemned for holding such a view. Yet at the same time these very same theologians continued to affirm the doctrine that the Logos is begotten of the Father. The Son in their view derives his being from God the Father. Athanasius says this: “the Son has His being not of Himself but of the Father” (On the Opinion of Dionysius 15).  Hilary (another church father) declares that “He is not the source of His own being. . . . it is from His [the Father's] abiding nature that the Son draws His existence through birth” (On the Trinity 9.53; 6.14; cf. 4.9). These same theologians who affirmed the full equality of the Son and the Father also affirmed that the Son doesn’t have existence in himself but derives his being from the Father. Despite their assurances to the contrary, I don’t think that this can do anything but diminish the Son because he becomes an effect which is contingent upon the Father. Even if this eternal procession takes place necessarily and apart from the Father’s will, the Son is less than the Father because the Father alone exists a se, that is to say through himself or of himself. He has aseity. The Father exists a se while the Son exists through another.

It is very interesting to note that the early church fathers interpreted the Arian proof-text (John 14:28), “The Father is greater than I,” not in terms of Christ’s humanity but in terms of his being generated eternally from the Father. Athanasius, for example, affirms that the reason the Father is greater than the Son is because only the Father is unbegotten. Similarly Hilary says, “The Father is greater than the Son: for manifestly He is greater Who makes another to be all that He Himself is, Who imparts to the Son by the mystery of the birth the image of His own unbegotten nature, Who begets Him from Himself into His own form” (On the Trinity 9.54). Doesn’t that make the Son therefore inferior to the Father if the Father is the source and the origin of the Son? Hilary denies it. Hilary says, “The Father therefore is greater, because He is Father: but the Son, because He is Son, is not less” (9.56). The Father is greater than the Son, but the Son is not less than the Father. That’s just to talk logical nonsense. That’s like saying that six is greater than three, but three is not less than six. That just doesn’t make logical sense.

Basil, one of the Cappadocian church fathers, sees the contradiction in Hilary’s statement, but he tries to avoid this contradiction by saying, “the evident solution is that the Greater refers to origination, while the Equal belongs to the Nature” (Fourth Theological Oration 9). So what Basil is saying is that the Father is greater in terms of origination (because he's unbegotten, whereas the Son is begotten) but in terms of nature they both share the same nature and therefore are equal. This reply seems to me to raise all kinds of difficult questions. Doesn’t it belong to the nature of the Father as an individual person to be unbegotten? And doesn’t it belong to the nature of the Son as an individual person to be begotten? Or is there a possible world in which the Father is begotten rather than unbegotten? Classical trinitarian theology would deny this. So how are the Father and the Son equal in nature if greatness refers to origination and the manner of their origination is essential to their individual natures? Suppose that they are equal in nature (their essence) but that the Father has the contingent property of being unbegotten and the Son has the contingent property of being begotten. In that case they have the same nature but the Father still has this contingent property of being unbegotten, a property the Son lacks. Wouldn’t that make him greater than the Son at least in this respect?

So at the end of the day what Basil has to say is that having self-existence is not after all a perfection or a great-making property. He says, “That which is from such a Cause is not inferior to that which has no Cause; for it would share the glory of the Unoriginate, because it is from the Unoriginate” (Ibid.). That does not seem to me to be a convincing answer. To be dependent upon the unoriginated being for one’s existence is to lack a ground of being in oneself alone, and that surely is not as great as to be a self-existent being that is able to exist all on one’s own. It has the ground of its existence in itself. This kind of derivative being is the same way in which creatures exist. Creatures exist in virtue of being caused by another.

So despite the protestations to the contrary, it does seem to me that Nicaean orthodoxy has not completely shed the sort of subordinationism that was introduced into the doctrine of the Trinity by the early Greek apologists with their Logos doctrine.

Ontological and Economic Trinity

So suppose that we drop from the doctrine of the Trinity the notion that the Son and the Spirit proceed eternally from the Father. Remember I said the model I've offered doesn't feature it, though it doesn't preclude it. So let's suppose we drop that. How then should we understand the intra-trinitarian relations? Here I want to draw a distinction between the ontological Trinity and the economic Trinity. By the ontological Trinity, I mean the Trinity as it exists in and of itself apart from God’s relationship to creation. This is the Trinity insofar as God exists in and of himself apart from any relation to the created order. The economic Trinity has reference to the different roles played by the persons of the Trinity in relation to the world and in particular to the plan of salvation. So the question that is: to what degree is the economic Trinity a reflection of the ontological Trinity?

Here I want to mention a church father that is perhaps not so well known to you, but important in his own time – Marcellus of Ancyra. Marcellus was one of the leaders at the Council of Nicaea who championed the orthodox cause. But as Marcellus read the Gospel of John he noticed that the Logos is not referred to as “the Son” until after the incarnation. In fact you would be hard-pressed to find anywhere in the New Testament where there is a reference unambiguously to the pre-incarnate Christ as “the Son.” These observations led Marcellus to hypothesize that prior to creation the economic Trinity just did not exist. The Logos becomes “the Son” only with his incarnation. So on Marcellus’ view the relations in the economic Trinity do not always mirror the distinctions within the ontological Trinity. Although they didn't agree with Marcellus’ rather maverick view, both Athanasius and the other members of the Nicene party continued to support him. Although he was pushing the boundaries of orthodoxy, they felt that he was still one of themselves and part of the orthodox party.

Similarly on the model that I’ve presented the persons of the ontological Trinity can be just as similar to one another as three individuals can be in terms of having the same knowledge, the same love, the same will, although each one from its own first-person perspective. In a possible world in which God did not create any world at all but just existed alone the economic Trinity would not exist even though the ontological Trinity would exist.

In contrast to Marcellus we don’t need to say that the economic Trinity began at the moment of creation. We could say that the economic Trinity exists eternally because the persons of the Godhead all knew the respective roles that they would play in the plan of salvation. They have foreknowledge of the different roles that they will play even if the deployment of that economy doesn't take place until the fullness of time when Christ eventually becomes incarnate and so forth.

On this view the economic Trinity can be just as eternal as the ontological Trinity, but it isn't fundamental to the nature of God or of the persons. On this view within the economic Trinity there is subordination (or maybe a better word would be submission) of one person to another. As we’ve read in the Scripture, the Son submits to and does the Father’s will, and the Spirit speaks not on his own account, but he speaks on behalf of the Son. This economic Trinity does not mirror or reflect differences between the persons in the ontological Trinity. Rather the economic Trinity is an expression of God’s free and loving condescension on our behalf for the sake of our salvation. So on this view the error of Logos Christology was conflating the economic Trinity with the ontological Trinity and thereby introducing subordinationism right into the nature of God himself rather than seeing it as purely functional.

So those are my comments on the Trinitarian processions. What I’ve said is highly controversial, and I've tried to represent fairly what Nicene orthodoxy holds and how my view would differ from it. But my model doesn't preclude, as I say, the procession of one person from another; it just doesn’t include it, and it seems to me that that’s a strength of the model in light of these comments.

Next time I will offer a plausibility argument for the truth of the doctrine of the Trinity.

## Doctrine of Trinity (Part 11): Argument for the Truth of the Doctrine of the Trinity
December 19, 2023
    Download
Argument for the Truth of the Doctrine of the Trinity

Today we bring our study of the doctrine of the Trinity to a close. You'll remember I have defended a model of the Trinity according to which we think of God as an infinite, unembodied soul, but a very special sort of soul, namely, a soul so richly endowed that God has three sets of rational faculties, each sufficient for personhood, so that God is a tri-personal being. I explained last time that this doctrine or model does not feature, but neither does it preclude, relations of derivation between the three members of the Trinity. We can think of them as simply three co-equal members of the triune God, or we can add derivation relations if we want to. It seems to me that this is a positive feature of the model.

Today I’d like to wrap up by offering a plausibility argument for the truth of the doctrine of the Trinity. The doctrine of the Trinity belongs to revealed theology, not natural theology. That is to say, you will not be able to prove that God is a tri-personal being through the resources of human reason alone. You might be able to prove that God exists, but you wouldn’t know that God is a Trinity. Rather, this is a matter of divine revelation, and one accepts this doctrine based upon God’s self-revelation in Scripture as a tri-personal being: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Still, we can ask if there are any arguments that would support the plausibility of this doctrine.

I want to close our discussion of the Trinity with a plausibility argument that has been defended by a number of contemporary Christian philosophers for God’s being a plurality of persons. The argument goes like this. By definition God is the greatest conceivable being. That’s St. Anselm’s insight in the ontological argument. If you could conceive of anything greater than God, then that would be God. So by definition God is the greatest conceivable being. Now as the greatest conceivable being, God must be morally perfect. The greatest conceivable being must be morally perfect because to be morally perfect is a great-making property. Love is a moral perfection, and therefore a most perfect being (a greatest conceivable being) must be a loving being. It is better for a person to be loving than to be unloving. So as a morally perfect person God must be essentially loving – a perfectly loving being.

When you think about the nature of love, it belongs to the very nature of love to give oneself away to another. Love reaches out to another person rather than centering wholly in oneself. If you love, you are giving yourself away to another. Since God is perfectly loving by his very nature (this belongs to the essence of God), that means that God must be giving himself in love to another. But who is that other? It cannot be any created person because creation is a result of God’s free will, not a result of his nature. It belongs to the very nature of God to be loving, but it doesn't belong to the very nature of God to be creating. So we can imagine a possible world in which God freely chooses to refrain from creating anything at all. There are no creatures at all in such a world, and God remains solitary and alone. And yet God would still need to be loving in such a world because love belongs to his very nature as the most perfect being. So created persons, though they are loved by God, cannot be the explanation for whom God essentially loves. Moreover, we know from modern science that created persons have not always existed. The universe has been around for some 14 billion years, and human beings have only appeared relatively recently on the scene. Therefore even though God loves created persons, they are not eternal. They have not always existed. But God is eternally loving. He didn’t just begin to be loving some time ago when human beings came into existence. So, again, created persons cannot sufficiently explain or account for God’s being a perfectly loving being.

It therefore follows that the other to whom God’s love is necessarily directed must be internal to God himself. In other words, God is not a single isolated individual person as unitarian forms of theism like Islam hold. Rather God must be a plurality of persons as the Christian doctrine of the Trinity affirms. On a unitarian view of God like Islam, God is a person who does not give himself away essentially in love for another. He is focused essentially only on himself, and therefore he cannot be the most perfect being, the greatest conceivable being. But on the Christian view, God is a triad of persons in eternal, self-giving, love relationships. Because God is essentially loving, the doctrine of the Trinity is more plausible than any unitarian concept of God.

Now the obvious reply to this argument is to say that being perfectly loving requires no more than the disposition to love another, should another person be about. A sailor marooned on a desert island, for example, may be said to be a loving person due to his disposition to love and should not be characterized as less loving because he happens to be alone. But the case of God is crucially different, it seems. For God, as a maximally great being, is not dependent upon contingent circumstances to express His love. He can create persons to love if needs be. In His case His essential disposition to give Himself away in love to another cannot remain unactualized. A God who has the power to create persons to whom He can give Himself in love but who refuses to do and is content to remain alone cannot be said to be perfectly loving, even dispositionally. But if God includes within Himself a plurality of persons, then there is no need to create persons in order for His loving disposition to be expressed.

I think this is a very good argument for thinking that God is a plurality of persons. It doesn’t prove that God is three persons, but it does show that there must be a plurality of persons in God to whom God’s love is necessarily directed. Therefore it serves to show the plausibility, at least, I think, of the doctrine of the Trinity.

 

Application of the Doctrine of the Trinity

Let me go on to say a word about the application of the doctrine of the Trinity to our lives. There are three points that I wanted to share.

1. The doctrine of the Trinity helps us to order our prayer lives correctly. When the disciples came to Jesus and said to him, Teach us to pray, how did Jesus teach them to pray? He taught them to pray to the Father. “Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.” Our prayers are to be directed to the Father. Jesus also said, Whatever you ask in my name I will do it for you. So we are to come to the Father in the person and the authority of the Son. It is because we are in Christ that we dare to approach the throne of the holy God, sinful creatures though we are, to make our requests. Then we do it in the power of the Holy Spirit. Remember Paul says in Romans 8, We don’t know how to pray as we ought but the Holy Spirit helps us in our weakness with groans too deep to be uttered, and he who knows the mind of the Spirit then knows what requests we make of him and what we need. The Spirit intercedes for us according to God’s will. So while one might on occasion pray to the Lord Jesus or invoke the presence of the Holy Spirit, the normal model for our prayer life ought to be prayer directed to the Father in the authority and name of the Son and with the power of the Holy Spirit.

2. The Trinity provides a healthy model of the family and the marriage relationship. Remember we saw that in the ontological Trinity all three of the persons are co-equal. They are all omnipotent, omniscient, morally perfect, eternal, and so forth. They are all partakers of the divine nature and so completely equal. And yet in the economic Trinity these persons take on different roles in the plan of salvation. The Father sends the Son into the world. The Son takes a human nature to himself and dies on the cross as substitutionary punishment for our sins. The Holy Spirit then works in the place of the Son to establish the church until the Son returns to Earth. So there is a subordination (or a submission) of the persons in the economic Trinity. The Son submits to the Father and his will. The Holy Spirit submits to the Son and stands in his place and continues his ministry. So even though all three of the persons are co-equal there is a kind of submission of one person to another within the economic Trinity.

In the same way, in the marriage relationship the husband and the wife are co-equal before God – both made in the image of God. In Galatians 3:28 Paul says, “In Christ there is neither male nor female, slave nor free, but you are all one in Christ Jesus.” So before God’s throne the husband and the wife are co-equal. Similarly the children are equal with the parents insofar as they are in Christ and before God. They are all equal. But in the family unit, for the sake of the functioning of the family, God says that the wife should submit to her husband’s leadership and that the children should submit to their parents and do as they are commanded by their parents. Contrary to what feminists assert, this does not in any way imply inferiority of the wife or of the children. This is a purely functional submission for the sake of order in the family and doesn’t imply the inferiority of the wife or the inferiority of the children, who are all co-equal before God.

3. Finally, I wanted to share with you an email I got from a student who listens to the Defenders class and wanted me to share something of the impact that the doctrine of the Trinity had on his own personal spiritual life. So I want to read this testimonial that was sent in by Diego. He said,

As you wrap up the doctrine of the Trinity in Defenders class I was hoping that at the end of your lecture you would share with the class how much of a difference this doctrine can make in a believer’s spiritual life as it did for me by illuminating some of the other attributes of God that we have already discussed.

For me, the Trinity illuminated how, as you have said, creation like salvation is an act of God’s grace. I think that you express this concept well in your article “Divine Timelessness and Personhood”[1] even though you were talking about God’s relationship to time. Still this paragraph just struck me. [Here he quotes a paragraph from that article]

Consider the love relationship between the members of the Trinity! Since intra-Trinitarian relations are not based on physical influence chains or rooted in any material substrata, but are, as it were, purely telepathic, the response of the Son to the Father’s love entails neither change nor temporal separation. Just as we speak metaphorically of two lovers who sit, not speaking a word, gazing into each other’s eyes as “lost in that timeless moment,” so we may speak literally of the timeless mutual love of the Father, Son, and Spirit for one another. . . . Within the fullness of the Godhead itself, the persons of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit enjoy the inter-personal relations afforded by the Trinity which God is. As a Trinity, God is eternally complete, with no need of fellowship with finite persons. It is a marvel of God’s grace and love that He would freely create finite persons and invite them to share in the love and joy of the inner Trinitarian life of God.

What a gift! What a life! When I first read that it was like a switch went off in my head and my heart. I understood what God’s love really meant. How absolutely holy and sacred the Trinity is. His aseity took on a whole new level for me because if he has a life like that why would he need anything else? I was so grateful for God’s power and eternity because that meant he could create creatures like me to enjoy that relationship forever. And his omniscience implied that he would know how to providentially order the world so that I would come to know him. The phrase “How Great Is Our God” finally made sense to me as did the incarnation and the atonement. To think that Christ would suffer the agonies of hell on the cross for my benefit so that I could enter into that relationship free from the sin that separated me from it, it brings tears to my eyes. Wow! What a God he is. This is more than I could ever expect even from the paradigm of goodness. So if you have time, please tell the folks in the class what a difference this doctrine can make in their lives. It sure has made a difference in mine.

Respectfully,

Diego

I thought that was a wonderful testimony to the practical implications in the spiritual life of this doctrine of the Trinity.

 

 
[1]          See http://www.reasonablefaith.org/divine-timelessness-and-personhood (accessed September 30, 2016).